We're in the office of Bruce McClendon in the
municipal building of Fort Worth. Bruce, after
you left Galveston, you went to Beaumont, and tell
us a little bit about the program in Beaumont and
what your role in that was. Well, Beaumont was just
as much of a challenge as Galveston in that It was
the right time. Something needed to be done and
people wanted it done. The manager who hired me,
Ray Riley, was outstanding. He and his classmates
from that particular class of KU all turned out to
be very successful. It's Anderson in Dallas, Lou
Fox in San Antonio, Muhlenbeck, who was down in
Galveston, and Ray Riley. And I thought Ray Riley
was the one who was more skilled, more gifted as a
manager than any of the others. He is now working in
the private sector and the head of a major
corporation down here in the Beaumont area, a very
successful individual. But Ray had a little bit of
a planning background. He had interned up in the
Kansas City, Lawrence area in a planning kind of
capacity. So he knew the terminology, he knew the
techniques, he knew the deficiencies that
existed, and he gave me broad marching orders to
basically create a planning program to do
something with respect to planning. Everything
they had was 20 or 30 years old. They had old
comprehensive plans, old zoning, old
subdivision regulations, no capital
improvements programming. A planner's dream. I
mean, here you're given the resources and the
direction to do something. Who had been the
planning director previously? Somebody from
Chicago had been brought in for a couple of years.
Anderson, I believe, was his name, John Anderson.
And John was a regional, had come from a regional
planning commission. And there was a big jump from
regional planning to municipal planning. I don't
think John and I have been able to make that jump.
And he had a young staff out of the way, part of the
state. So he really didn't have
the staff in place or the experience, in my
judgment, to be as effective as he put it in. And he
tended to sit on his staff a little bit. I was a
little bit afraid of them for the younger ones that
did have some energy initiative. Well, our first
priority was to do the zoning ordinance. And it
took about a year, year and a half, very
controversial. They had a 25-year-old zoning
ordinance, Beaumont, that historically did
anti-regulation. They had passed zoning in
something like 1948. And then the year after that,
the public referendum, they rejected zoning. And
then back in about 1954, 55, the zoning wave came
again and basically the development community
produced an ordinance that, you know, was kind of
one of those things where if we're going to have
zoning, it might be something we can live with. So
we had this ordinance. It was only about 40 pages
long. Very skimpy, cumulative zoning. It was more
of a devious kind of ordinance. The district
labels, for example, didn't link up to what the
district really was, so you could come in and get R3
zoning, residential multifamily zoning, and
they ended up allowing commercial, too. It was all
sorts of... Well, then you revised the zoning
ordinance, and then after that, what was the...
Revised the zoning ordinance, very
controversial, very emotional experience. It
took us a year and a half because the ordinance was
so old. Recall was threatened. Lots of things
happened there. But when the smoke finally
cleared on that, we got a new ordinance in place
that's a very good format, good model for the
format that can be used by other places. To
implement, as part of the implementation
process, we incorporated some aspects of our plan
into our zoning ordinance, which makes that a
little bit unique in that sense. And we used that as
a springboard then to develop our comprehensive
plan. They had been trying to do a comprehensive
plan for about five years, but there was a lot of
data in place. It meant in a very short period of
time, less than a year, we were able to reduce the
land use. Really, the first element was the park
and open space element, followed shortly
thereafter by the land use element of the
comprehensive plan. We did the park and open space
because, A, we needed something less
controversial at the zoning ordinance. We had to
try to earn our spurs and win our way back into the
community. So we did the park and open space plan,
did establish the process and the format,
issue-oriented planning process with
measurable objectives as a result of the final
product. We had a plan that we called, that we
described as the goals, objectives, policies,
and proposals. We presented this in the graphic
format. We tried to use the unified submarine
approach of Kent. We produced, our plan that was
actually published was a fold-out brochure that
fit into the pocket of the plan itself. The next
step was to do the land use plan. The land use plan
was completed while I was there. We were able to go
through one and I think two update cycles of the
park and open space plan where we, in essence,
evaluated our accomplishments during the past
year, identified new issues that emerged,
proposed solutions or treatments to those
issues, and set a work program for the following
year. We called it an action plan, which was really
a one-year detailed program for implementation
of our plan. We were able to start the cycle on the
land use element. When the plans were adopted,
they contained language that required that they
be reviewed and updated annually, and report from
the staff and commission actioned by the city
council. Did it bother you at all that the zoning
ordinance rewrite preceded the development of
the comprehensive plan? Sure. In theory, you
know, we all, everybody knows the theory that we
should be planning before we do zoning. And the one
reason it took us a year and a half to do the zoning
was because we did some of the planning. With your
left hand while you were doing the zoning with your
right, I suppose. Well, and we integrated into the
ordinance. I mean, because people couldn't
understand. If we had been trying to do the
planning on the side, we wouldn't have gone very
far. So we took elements of the plan, the
principles, concepts, and standards for
residential, commercial, and industrial
development. These were actually integrated
into the text of the plan itself. So there was an
understanding of the planning foundation of the
ordinance that we were going through. This was the
only thing I could do because The priority was to do
the update to zoning ordinance. The council
wanted it, the manager wanted it, so we had to
pursue it. What's really ironic about that is when
the development community tried to stop the
updating process, and that's one reason why I drug
out for a year and a half, but as their last gas
effort to stop it, they started lecturing the
council that it was important that you do planning
before you do zoning, and that we ought to defer the
plan, the zoning, until we can complete updating
the comprehensive plan. That's ironic. Yeah, it
was really, really interesting. And, of course,
once we finished the plan, the ordinance, the
development community said, well, what's all the
rush on the plan now? Uh-huh. Sure. But it was
actually the Chamber of Commerce that was beating
the drums at the very end for a comprehensive plan.
It's the way it ought to be. Yes, it should have
been. Where were they when I got there? So I was
there three and a half, four years and the last
thing that we did was the capital improvements
program. The first time that city had a legitimate
real world program, capital improvements
program with priorities, analysis of the fiscal
funding sources, identification of where the
money was going to come from to fund the various
capital projects. And the plan itself was
reviewed annually, I suppose, as a basis for the
CIP. The plan, in fact, that was the first block we
checked was conformance with the plan and whether
or not we were integrating or implementing the
comprehensive plan. Are there any cities that
you're aware of in Texas that have this kind of
relationship between zoning and CIP and the
conference plans? No, to my knowledge, the
Beaumont system is just far superior. We took the
theory and we made it work there. Terrific
opportunity. You know, again, the manager was
there. We had, Maury Myers was the mayor who was
He's probably the most outstanding mayor in the
United States. He and Henry Cisneros are peas in a
pod in terms of their judgmental leadership
ability. He resigned, or when his term was up, he
did not run again. And he is now the mayor again
because of all the trouble they're having. In
Beaumont, he came back. and put himself back in the
harness and ran for office again. Because of the
economy? Because of the economy and the downturn.
He was just that kind of a person that he couldn't
turn his back on his community. When he didn't run
again, it wasn't because the community didn't
want him. It was that he wanted to do other things,
and he had given his public service. Just looking
back over your career here in Texas, beginning
with Corpus Christi and then moving on to
Galveston and then Beaumont and Fort Worth, It
sounds to me like you tried certain things out
initially in Corpus Christi and were frustrated
there because of management and the whole
political climate, then moved on to Gauss and you
were able to do a little bit more, and then when you
got to Beaumont you found that the ground had
already been fertilized, so that you were given
more or less a free hand to exercise theory and
apply it to a practical situation. That's a very
good summary. There is no question that in terms of
effectiveness, my most effective program was
BOVA. On a scale of 1 to 10, it was a 9. In Galveston,
Because I was there shorter and there was so much
less that I could do, I would say my effectiveness
was a seven. But I was real pleased with the
Galveston achievements, too. We were able to, the
bottom line was results. We produced big results.
There was tremendous payback in Galveston. But in
Beaumont, I was able to put the theory to practice
and something to come from it. And the
implementation resulted and took place. So it was
a planner's dream. Now, you were in Beaumont at the
time that you were elected to the presidency of
APA. That's right. What were the circumstances
that prompted you to run for national office?
Well, I had been president of the Texas chapter of
APA. Who was the vice president then? Who was the
vice president then? I couldn't tell you. I don't
know. You'll find out. It's funny. Sarah Jane was
the secretary and treasurer on that board. I do not
remember who the vice president was. We'll fill it
in later. In my involvement is the chapter
president. I serve in the chapter president's
council, which is a board of chapter presidents
all across the country that meets at the national
level and advise and serves in a little bit of an
advisory capacity to the national APA board.
Well, in that capacity, we dealt with primarily
the budget issue. increasing the dues and the
National Board was of the opinion we needed to
increase our dues a substantial amount, 20, 25
percent. I was of the opinion and other members of
the chapter that if there was a big gap between the
National Board and what the members and what the
members felt and wanted from their organization.
And I met those people on the National Board and
they were respected, influential, higher up
people in planning. And my assessment of them was
that they weren't close to the customer. That they
had been involved in the profession for so many
years and had risen to such a level that they
couldn't remember their roots. their
experiences as planter ones and planter twos, and
they didn't have contact with these entry-level
or mid-range type planters. So they didn't know
what the heart of the profession was all about
anymore. And I thought they were insensitive and
uncaring in a sense, and very egotistical. It was
almost the all AICP kind of thing. I really did
perceive that they didn't really care. And we
thought and we did a lot of work as the chapter
presidents to advise the APA board. And the
response from the APA board was just to brush us off
as if we didn't know anything, didn't have
anything to contribute. And their view was they
knew as much about the organization and the needs
of the members as we did, and that they were in touch
with the membership and it was us, the chapter
presidents, that were out of touch. And the
national board, as I remember at that time, had
historically been composed of people from The
Eastern Seaboard community. From the Eastern
Seaboard, and they were predominantly
academicians with a sprinkling of practicing
consultants. Probably on a 21-member board, I
think only two or three may have been city planner
types, you know, senior planners, or they were
most of, you know, a planning director kind of
person. Sure. They were not what the heart of the
organization was. Because we can't put down
academicians. No, only in the sense of the
domination. I don't think. I saw something that
says that the academic community constitutes 8%
or 9% of the APA membership. If you're
representing 8% of the membership and you have 60%
of the board, there's an imbalance there. And
there was an imbalance. So I came home and I was
madder than hell from the meeting. And the more I
started paying attention to what APA was doing,
and the little newsletters that they would send
out in their news and whatever it is. It became
clearer and clearer to me that there wasn't
grassroots inaction there, that the board had
lost touch with the membership. other chapter
presidents shared this frustration with me. And
they called me and said, and I had been, as you know
me, I had been pretty visible in my capacity on the
chapter presidents council. I'm very
opinionated and I'm a strong fighter and a
promoter. And so I've promoted our position very
strongly and impressed some people. They felt
like here's a person who cares and here's a person
who can carry our banner. So there were folks that
called me and said, we need to do something about
billing candidates, running for the board,
trying to make our position known, and have a
referendum on what it is we're all about. So I said,
well, let me see if we can find somebody. So I tried
to call, I tried to get Mary Lou Henry, who was the
person I knew most about, who just, I'd followed
her as chapter president or at this point here.
Really, she'd been out of office for one term
before I followed her. And Mary Lou, was a
knowledgeable, informed, educated, just
outstanding individual. So I tried to get Mary Lou
to run for the board and for the president. I said,
that's how you're going to make a statement. One
position out of 21 can't do anything unless it's
the president. So I tried to talk Mary Lou into
running. She was appreciative of the offer, but
couldn't do it because a good friend of hers from
California Okay, at Pomona.
Cal State at Pomona. Margarita McCoy. Margarita
McCoy had already been nominated and she couldn't
run against Margarita. Well, we could run against
Margarita. What it came down to is when I reported
back to this little network that had been creating
attractive presidents, a decision was made that I
would run. I think everybody that really knows me
has always understood that it wasn't me running
because I wanted to run at that time. I really had
other things to do. I had a new job, and it was up to my
neck. And we couldn't recruit a viable candidate.
And I had a lot of fire in the stomach, in the belly,
as the expression goes. So I took on the challenge.
I really didn't campaign that hard. I used the
network that I had built up over the years. I ran
through the nomination process. I had chapter
presidents circulating my petition. I had over
200 people from across the country that signed.
You were a write-in candidate. Yes, I was a
write-in candidate. Nobody had ever been
successful as a write-in candidate before.
Nobody wanted to try it again. And no one from Texas
had been president before. No one from Texas had
been president. We had one person that had served
on the board. In fact, no one from the southwest
part of the country had ever been president of APA.
Sure, he had also been on the board. Of the old AIP.
Yeah. Or ASPO. He'd been on the board of the old
ASPO. And no city planner. had ever been president
of APA. They had always been academicians. They
had always been consultants. I was the first City
planner. Practicing city planner to be on APA
presidents. That's remarkable. Yeah. Or as polar
AIP, according to the staff there in Washington.
And they were able to do the research on things. We
had people who had been practicing at some point in
their career that had become presidents, but no
sitting, no practicing person had done it. In
terms of accomplishments you indicated before,
there's
a couple of them. The long term, the short term
ones, were that I was able to take some very
emotional, confrontational issues involving
things like where's the office going to be
located, what was going to happen to our magazine.
There's some things I was able to do. And the
position of the executive director. weren't able
to do anything about the position of the executive
director. That was very controversial. That was
controversial, and the executive director
survived. The board voted. The year I took office,
the board voted. to retain his installment as
executive director by one vote. With,
ironically, again enough, the student
representative on the board casting the deciding
vote. Really? So I often tell students... Who was
that, McNutt? No, it was a fellow from Yemigai,
from back east, Cincinnati or someplace. But for
students who often say, why should I get involved
in APA, how can I make a difference, or whatever it
was, one student cast one vote that made a
difference as to our executive director. In my
election, there were also some other malcontents
that were elected, some people that didn't like
the system. This was the first emergence, really,
of the Dan Lauber faction into outreach capacity.
There was a Lauber faction consisting of people
like Bill Toner and Edie Netter and himself, but
they were former APA PASPOL staffers who used to
work for the organization. You'd come back in, you
understood the system, knew how to manipulate it,
knew how to win an election process and they were
there. Well this was the first year that Lauber
reached out How do you say that? L-A-U-B-E-R.
L-A-U-B-E-R. And his first name is? Daniel. Dan.
And there was a faction on the board. There was this
more of the old-timer, elitist group. They'd be
classified or described as the AICP faction. And
then there was this Lauber faction that was
started out in the guise of, he called it the good
old planter, which was the average planter out
there. And Lauber thought, that the board was
missing. He thought like I did in that sense, that
the board wasn't responsive. Now as time evolved
and as my term went on, I learned after about a year
that Dan Lauber basically had his own views of the
organization and that his views really were not
grassroots, that he really didn't have a desire to
listen to the customer, so to speak, and be
responsive to the membership, as much as he had his
own ideas of what the membership wanted, and he
felt like it ought to be run in that fashion. So in a
sense, in my experience on the board, was he
started replacing the elitism of AICP with the
elitism of Dan Lauber. And I came in as the
grassroots. Bill from the bottom up. And I think
one of my contributions is the involvement is that
I became a focal point. I needed credibility to
this perspective. And chapter presidents like
Jim Duncan linked up with him. From Florida. From
Florida. Yeah, from Florida. linked up and saw,
and I gave them a focal point for them to become
involved in, and I pointed them to positions on the
board, both Jim and Norman Staniford, who's also
from Florida. People who were the grassroots kind
of organization, very non-assuming,
Unegotistical. Folks who cared about the
organization, who cared about making the
organization more responsive to the members.
Folks who believed in the Toffler and the, who
wrote the Megatrends. That's the deal about
building from the grassroots into what's the
problem with these large organizations. And we
put something in place, we put our system in place,
which was basically using the mechanism of the
chapter presidents to battle Lauber's system in
place, which was his Inside AGA newsletter and the
network that had been built up in that newsletter
over the years. Again, Lauber's newsletter was
intended to manipulate and get backing behind him
for his positions, as opposed to the chapter
presidents, who really went out with the
grassroots, open mind, let us be responsive to
what you can do. Where is Lauber? Where does he come
from? Lauber's in Chicago, and he's got his own
quasi-consulting firm. He just, you know, he
probably reports $15,000 a year income or
something. A very modest living fellow who was
working on the law degree when he was on the board.
In fact, got his, passed his bar exam the year he was
president. My last year, my first year on the
board, I was completely ineffective. The only
thing I accomplished in that first year was moving
the APA conference from the national conference
from Houston to San Antonio. My second year as
president, I was relatively effective because
there were some outsiders that were brought in on
the board. The first year I was elected, there were
more that were brought in the second year. And I
started to earn some respect on my positions. And
basically, it's like anything you go into. I was an
outsider. I was not trusted. I was put down in my
first year. Second year, people respected the
heck out of me. I did some very positive things. We
built, we pulled, as opposed to destroying. First
year, I came in relatively negative. Second year,
I was able to build some things as a president and
appoint some committees to make things happen.
And we were able to resolve some very
controversial emotional issues that had dogged
the organization for many years. And so in a sense,
I wasted a lot of my year in office Solving the
agenda, the problems that had existed for a number
of years, I really wasn't able to do as much as I
wanted to do and go into the areas that I wanted to
do. But I was effective for the organization. And,
uh, and the other board members told me at the end of
my term that I had been more effective than they
could remember in many, many, many years. And
they're very complimentary. as to my term in
office. And it's self-supporting for me to say
this. And I hope as a follow-up on this, you might
call the installment and ask him to assess my term
in office. When my term was up and I turned the gavel
over to Dan Lauber to come in and take my place,
there was enthusiastic applause from the board
who was in place. And Iz told me they couldn't
remember that ever happening before. And he said
it was sincere, it was genuine, it was really a
reflection of people's appreciation toward my
term in office. So I felt, as an egotist, I felt very
pleased with that. My third year on the board, as an
immediate past president, was a complete wasted
year. Basically, it was a year where I tried to stop
the things that Dan Lauber was doing. Instead of
being positive, I basically had to go into a, let's
just, you know, reactive, and let's just try to
stop this guy for one year. I was trying to live
through it. So that was disappointing. What was
his basic point of view? What was he trying to do
with APA? He was trying to kill AICP. He was trying
to dismantle the divisions. He was trying to
strangle, cut off the resources to the chapters.
Basically, he was trying to recreate an ASCO
organization. which is the organization he was
exposed to as an employee. He had worked for ASPO.
So he had worked for them, and he liked that kind of
environment. He tried to go back and recreate it. I
tend to come from the grassroots volunteer
perspective, and I wanted to see the organization
build on the strength of our volunteers, not be
centralized. I was promoting decentralization,
he was promoting centralization. Well, that was
the basic difference between ASPO and APA, or AIP
in those days, was that AIP had a chapter
structure, and it could rely on its membership
throughout the country. What I tried to do was take
the strengths of both organizations and build on
them and get rid of the weaknesses and weed those
things out, the things that we weren't doing well
or that were detrimental. There were many things
ASPO did that are very solid, such as the technical
publications. No question, they had a superior
Their program was of more value to me growing up as a
planner than AIP. AIP did a better job of sharing
the grassroots, the networking kind of thing, to
check the functions, getting out where I was as an
entry-level person where I couldn't go to some of
the national things. So what we really needed to do
after the merger was do the best of both. And there
wasn't a faction. that was opposed to anything of
an old-ass pope, and there was a faction that was
opposed to anything of the AIP. The last year, my
year's presidency, the factions really
disintegrated and disappeared. The AICP elitism
was no longer there, but there was this
emerging-ass pope thing that was very difficult
to deal with, very emotional and
confrontational.
One of the lasting contributions I made was this
these charter amendments where we provided for
AICP to elect AICP to elect their own board. We had a
vicious cycle that was taking place where whoever
ran with the strongest position against AICP was
getting elected to the AICP board. We were
literally bringing in people that were opposed to
the organization. So it became very important, if
we're going to save it, to switch the balloting
procedures so that AICP votes for AICP and the AICP
commission. The board is too complex to talk about
now, but there's an APA board and an AICP
commission. I think that charter change which Dan
Louder fought like hell to stop, is what saved this
organization. If we didn't do that, I think even as
early now as now, we would have a separatist
movement. We'd have a separate old AIP
organization back again. Or it could have
possibly disintegrated into any number of
regional professional organizations. Well, in
truth, that's what Jim Duncan and I were going to
do. As Florida chapter president, Jim, and I as
Texas chapter president, we were going to create a
Gulf Coast Planning Association with our
membership at both ends providing the anchor. And
we had enough of a resource base. And it would have
killed APA. Yeah, it would have. But we weren't
interested in killing APA. We were really
interested in trying to get their attention. and
build a stronger organization based on the
grassroots permeation of our organization. Well
then, after Lauber left office, what... Well, now
we have Norm Krumholz as president, and Norm
doesn't have a mission. Norm's not obsessed. He
basically has an academic orientation. and he's
just going to preside over the organization for a
year. Next year, Jim Duncan will assume a chapter
of the national presidency. And Jim has this
chapter bias, this action orientation, the
culture of the consumer business philosophy. And
you will see the organization become much more
responsive next year. As this labor element
dissipates, the housekeeping of Krumholz will
consume this year. And then Jim will really have a
stage set for him to get in there And also the big
change is that Jim will have a two-year term. That
was one of the other changes we made in our
amendment process. We revised our charter. That
makes a lot of sense. Longer term in office. One
year, I was able to do some things. A lot more than
people thought I could in one year. If I could have
had another year as president, I could have had an
even greater or more long-term lasting impact. Oh
yeah, I'm sure. It takes about a year to get used to
any different thing. So that Jim Duncan will be the
second Texan to be a national president. That's
correct. He'll be the second practicing planner
to make national president. Well, let's move on
then. We've talked about Beaumont, and we've
talked about your role with National APA and, of
course, the Texas Chapter APA. Now we are in Fort
Worth. How about if I hit Arlington for about five
minutes? Okay. All right. We don't want to forget
Arlington. Yeah, Arlington, I'd like to forget
Arlington. Everybody has an Arlington in their
record somewhere, and I've got one, and that's
Arlington. In contrast to Beaumont, which was the
height of my career in terms of effectiveness,
Arlington was the absolute low point in my career
in effectiveness. I was not able to institute the
programs and produce the products and results
that I wanted to do. What were the reasons for that?
Well, I came into a community that was very smug, a
sense of arrogance, of superiority, that they
were God's gift to the world. You know, Arlington
had grown tremendously in population in the past
10 or 20 years, from a population of 20,000 to 200
and almost 50,000. Rapid growth. They made the
classic management mistake of... assuming that
luck was good management. They assumed, because
everything was relatively okay, that what they'd
been doing was profitable. In fact, it was the
Houston Syndrome. They were in an ideal location
between Dallas and Fort Worth. They were gaining
all the benefits of everybody around them.
through no fault of their own or no actions of their
own, their location. It was a traditional real
estate story about one of the three most important
factors in real estate investment, location,
location, location. Hey, Arlington had the
location. They had a strong mayor who early in his
career He used a Chamber of Commerce approach. He
brought in General Motors and Washington
Senators, became a Texas Rangers. What was his
name? Vandergrift. Outstanding individual. He
had the Chevrolet Buick. Chevrolet dealer, yeah.
Well, wasn't he also big in Texas Municipal
League? I doubt it. If he was, it would surprise me,
but he might have been. He had more of a Chamber of
Commerce approach, not really in the government.
So I'd be surprised if he was involved in a
government organization, but he could have been.
But... had a planning commission that was
dominated by a real estate interest. I said, well,
good grief, who's on here that represents the
citizens? And there was one woman on there,
housewife, and she was working for the Chamber of
Commerce. And I said, well, how about the guy from
the university? I said, geez, at least there's an
academic influence on here. And it turns out that
he was from the School of Business at UTA, which has
a completely different philosophy than a liberal
arts kind of professor or somebody. So you had a
commission that was hostile. We had a city manager
that says, it's time for us to do planning. We
haven't done it for 25 years. We're paying for it.
Arlington has an extraordinary amount of bonded
indebtedness, far more than any other city. 60% of
the budget is used to retire bond and debt, you
know, and the rule of thumb is 25%. But it happened
because they bought that growth. Here this growth
was coming anyway, but they subsidized the
development community. They did a fiscal impact
study in the late 70s that showed that the
population of the city had grown, the population
had grown 50% during this study period. Bonded
indebtedness had gone up something like 900%, and
per capita debt had gone up 400%. So nobody could
say that the debt was occurring because of the
growth. The debt was occurring because they
subsidized too much of it. They just underwrote
the growth at public expense. When this study was
done, by the way, they boxed it up and shoved it in
the closet. It was never released to the public.
The public didn't know the significance of those
fiscal implications. But Vandegrift did, and his
last act as he left when that study was there, they
changed some of the participation policies, and
the city was paying less from 77 or 78 on. They paid
less when Vandegrift left. From that point on, The
developers had to pay a higher proportion of their
costs. The manager knew changes had to occur. The
council, which was politically responsive to the
community, understood there was a growing
groundswell of interest in preserving the
quality of life. The people were afraid they were
losing what had brought them to Arlington to start
with. So, they went out, they recruited very
heavily to bring in a really innovative,
aggressive, you know, doer-oriented,
results-oriented planer. And I competed with
some real good people, including somebody that's
up here in the Metroplex, Matt Plano. I'm not sure
if you remember his name now. It's not my name
today. He's the planer director in Plano. Planer
director in Plano. But he's the North Central
Texas chapter president. Yeah, I know. I'll
remember. We'll fill that in. So the manager
wanted somebody good and the council wanted
somebody good, but they forgot to tell the
commission that they wanted somebody good. In my
first week in office or in town, they took me out to
dinner, the planning commission did. They asked
me what my plans were, what my philosophy was, what
I liked and didn't like, various things. And like
an idiot, I just told them, you know, hey, here's
what I like, here's what I can do, here's where we
can do better, here's where we're doing great. But
after that dinner, the following week prior to the
planning commission, I got visited by the
chairman of the commission, the vice chairman,
and they told me they were real disappointed in the
answers I had given, that they wanted to make sure I
understood how it was going to be in Arlington, and
that, number one, nothing was broke, so therefore
absolutely nothing was going to get fixed. And
that I should understand that. And that if I wanted
to be successful there, what I needed to do was to
get involved in a hobby. Get involved with
Arlington Initiative, which was a
goals-oriented local citizen group that the last
planning director, Jill Potthoff, had started.
Get involved with APA. Anyway, do whatever I
wanted to do outside local government. But not to
get involved with anything that was going on that
had been going on, that everybody was satisfied
with the status quo. And that I would have real
serious personal and professional problems if I
messed with them. Well, I passed this on to the city
manager, and the city manager said these people
are dinosaurs, they're out of date, this change is
coming. The council wants a change, and that's why
he hired me, and he expected me to see me make those
changes. So, yeah I started off in an adversarial
relationship with the commission. And for the
next two or three months it deteriorated because
as I continued to bring new programs and ideas,
they continued to tell me to drop dead and go to
hell, you know, get lost. Then a real bad thing
happened. The city manager who'd been there 20
years resigned and went into the private sector,
into the investment business. That was a career
move he'd wanted to make for some time. So he made
that transition. One of the assistant city
managers became the acting manager for a period of
about three or four months, five months, six
months. During that period of time, I became so
disgusted with my ineffectiveness with the
commission and their ability to stop everything
that I that I attempted to resign. I went upstairs
and the manager said I'm through. Life is too
short. I've got too much I want to accomplish. I'm
going to blow off six months of my life here in an
ineffective environment. And I said, the truth of
it is I know I can't be effective here. These people
are too skilled at maintaining the status quo.
They're going to study us to death. Anything that
we bring forward to them, they just give to a
committee. And you won't see it for a couple of
years. So the manager said that wasn't that he
didn't share that view of my effectiveness,
ineffectiveness. And he encouraged me to stay and
lead everything they could do, et cetera. And he
taught me to stay. Then five months later, we got a
new city manager. I worked for him for about two
months. I had a real blowout with the commission
and council over whether or not we were going to do
comprehensive planning. I went to the manager. I
resigned again. And the new manager convinced me
to stay. He said, you've only been here a month. You
need more time. You need to be effective. We can do
this. And here's what we can do to become more
effective. And he got the council to go along with
some things and put a lot of pressure on the
commission. And so for the last year, we made
progress. Slow, painful, drudging progress.
Given me, if I had stayed there another couple of
years, I could have been relatively effective. We
could have had something in place in Arlington
that I could have claimed credit for. But when this
opportunity opened for work, it could be
effective right away. It was a career
advancement. It was a challenge. In truth, I was
real pleased to get the chance to leave that
environment. Now, Beaumont has got a good
program. Arlington has got a good program in
place. Rose Jacobson is now standing planning
director. Ray Quay is the assistant over there.
Ray is going to have a state-of-the-art
comprehensive plan. For Arlington. For
Arlington. It's going to take a year longer than I
would have thought it would have taken, but the
commission over there is still roadblocking it.
There's been several resignations now. And the
chairman is still hanging on. He wants to be there
until the plan is finished. He was the biggest
obstacle to completing the plan, and now he's
stating his reputation on finishing the plan. He
tried to stop it for years, and now it's the old
thing we talk about in one of these other cities. If
you're going to have something, you're in
Beaumont. If you're going to have something, we
may have something we can live with. So he's trying
to make it something that he can live with. But it
was very disappointing two years on my part. Real,
real painful. And the planning director in
Arlington is now Rose? Rose Jacobson.
Outstanding. She is a hard worker, applies
herself every day, and she knows more about
playing each day than she did the day before.
Constantly learning, constantly applying, and
very strong. I laugh and call her the Dragon Lady
sometimes, but she is a very effective
administrator. Really a quality person. Very
good. That's hopeful. Now to Fort Worth. Now to
Fort Worth. What do you want to know about Fort
Worth, Bob? What are you doing here at Fort Worth?
How is your... What is the perception of the
planning program in Fort Worth? The history of
Fort Worth have already documented the ancient
history of planning in Fort Worth, so we needn't go
back to the Gruen Plan or any of that. But what we
need to do is sort of pick up on what happened during
the regime of the
previous planning director. Okay. The previous
planning director was James Toll, and James
inherited a losing program. They had fired
Stephen Andradeus and Darryl Noe. Planning was at
the low ebb, heartbreaking when you consider the
history that you just mentioned, the growing
plant, etc., Fort Worth had a history of effective
planning, respected planning across the
country. And in the latter, in the late 60s and then
in the 70s, in particular the latter part of the
70s. Every year planning got hurt a little bit more
than the year before. We lost a little bit of the
prestige that was over here. Andre just killed it,
finished it off, wiped it out. And it's not so much a
reflection on him as it was at the times. Times
change. People change. Values change. And your
planning program has to change with that. You have
to know when to go with the flow, when to be able to do
something, when to look for the programs that
people do want instead of trying to push what's no
longer acceptable. In Fort Worth, it's been very
effective in the citizen participation. There's
still a world class examples on how to involve
citizens in planning. But during the Andrade's
regime, credibility and support for the plane
just evaporated, disappeared, it was destroyed.
James Toll came in and... Where did he come from? He
was in the Parks Department. Been here many years,
hard-working young fella that really, with an
urban design background, and he came in and took on
this job and in four years or thereabouts created
tremendous public support and respect for
planning. Again, that's a good word, again. And I,
looking at him when I was in Beaumont and over in
Arlington, I admired the heck out of him. I thought
objectively that he was the most effective
planner that we had during the early 1980s, that he
did more, accomplished more in a hard, hot,
political context, he was able to do something and
establish credibility for this program that had
been lost.
He did it by taking on the big projects, by having
influence, by earning the respect of the
development community, the respect of the
business community, the respect of the elected
officials, respect for his judgment. He dealt
with a big picture, the Southwest freeways, the
cultural districts, the growth management
programs. He saw the concept of these people. He
made him, he sold the sizzle, you know, he put the
sizzle back into planning and got people excited
about planning again. And this is the legacy I
inherit. Now that I'm in here, I more than anything
else have to implement the vision that he's left in
place. And our major workload here is involving
the area of the Southwest Freeway, trying to do
something with our cultural district,
continuing the progress that's been made in our
downtown, and lastly and most importantly, is
implementing a growth management system. An
extraordinary idea. You know, there are two
cities in this state that are working on growth
management systems, Austin and Fort Worth, and
you couldn't think of two cities in greater
contrast than Austin and Fort Worth. And the Fort
Worth program is going to be successful, and I
don't know if the Austin will well be. And you would
think that it ought to be reversed, that when it
really comes down to it, And the citizens and the
business community really see what's in this for
Fort Worth that they might back off growth
management, but they won't. I think if anybody
backs off it, it'll be Fort Worth. I mean, it'll be
Austin. The only thing, Austin will panic when
they have an economic downturn. And they'll fill
the baby out with a wash, and they'll do away with
their interest and enthusiasm for growth
management. While Fort Worth is going to build on
its heritage and become the model for the
southwest of growth management. Well, it has a
legacy of many, many years of planning, and I think
that it probably will hold them in good stead as
they move forward. You have to build. See, Bob, the
beauty of Fort Worth is you can build on these
victories that have been out there in the past. We
need to update our sector plans. We don't need to
wait eight or nine years like they've done in the
past to update those things. We need to go into an
annual updating mode. We need to take our old
comprehensive plan that was done in 55 and combine
it with the sector plans and the district plans in
the growth management system and come up with a
modern, state-of-the-art, updatable
comprehensive plan. We're going to do that as part
of the growth management system here. You take
these victories, you take the sector plans that
everybody knows they've got awards for, and you
build on those and say, we've got to update these
things, and we've got to integrate these into the
growth management system now. You take the
Chamber's work on strategic... strategic plan
for economic development that everybody likes
and is proud of and you integrate that into the
growth management system. You take the
neighborhood planning programs that have
struggled here a little bit in the inner city under
the block grant program and you repackage those
under the guise of growth management. That in fact
inner city development and prioritizing and
encouraging development to turn into itself is a
key critical part of growth management. Unlike in
Austin or someplace that's looking at the
periphery of growth management, We're looking at
growth performance management. We want to
identify these target areas where we want growth
to occur, including our inner city. We want to put
programs in place that encourage and induce
development to take place. You build on the
successes, you find the things that are working,
and you paint whatever that is you're working on
with that brush. It's like in Beaumont, one of the
things we did besides putting all those plans in
place, we shifted the philosophy to economic
development. I tried to change the name of the
program, of the department, to the Department of
Planning and Economic Development. We pushed
UDACs, we pushed grants, partner with space
grants. In a city in two years, in a city that had
been hostile to grants, federal grants, we
brought in something like $11 or $12 million in
grants. And a department budget that had $600,000
or $700,000 in budgets for those two years, we
brought in $11 million in federal grants and money
to that area. Not block grants, not categorical
grants that we were entitled to. These were
categorical grants. These were competitive
grants where we competed with other cities. We
took our park and open space plan And our action
plan that we had, and we competed in the urban parks
and recreation recovery program. And in the first
funding period, the first six months or three
months of funding cycle, there was something like
$280,000 available for the Southwest, the entire
Southwest.